---
slug: "intro-to-dynamo"
date: "2022-05-22"
title: "Introduction to DynamoDB Data Modelling"
---

## What is DynamoDB?
DynamoDB is an AWS managed NoSQL database service. Unlike a conventional relational database that stores information in structured tables, DynamoDB data can be stored in key-value pairs or as documents. 

Compared to relational systems where queries can be expensive for high-volume traffic workloads, DynamoDB allows you to make fast queries to frequently accessed data. Schemas in DynamoDB are structured to optimize access for specific requirements. 

Part of the service is a guarantee of high availability and durability. DynamoDB data is automatically distributed across multiple servers and replicated across multiple availability zones within a region. 

Access the [Dynamo Whitepaper](https://www.allthingsdistributed.com/files/amazon-dynamo-sosp2007.pdf) to see the key-value store methodology under the hood of DynamoDB.

## Basic Terminology
**Table**
> - A collection of data

**Items**
> - A group of attributes that corresponds to a logical entity, similar to the idea of a row in a relational model

**Attributes**
> - Data element related to an item, similar to the idea of a field in a relational model
> - **Scalar** attributes only have one value
> - **Nested** attributes allow attributes to have multiple values

**Primary Key**
> - Key that uniquely identifies an item within a relation. There are two types in DynamoDB:
>   - **Partition Key**
>       - one attribute with a value that is unique to an item
>   - **Composite Key (Partition + Sort Key)**
>       - key with two attributes (partition and sort key)
>   - NOTE: the sort key is also called the **range attribute**

### Data Model

#### Partitioning
The base definition of partioning means breaking down something large and complex into smaller, more granular pieces. Due to the distributed nature of DynamoDB, primary keys contain partition keys that determine where the data is stored. 

The **partition key** is passed into a hash function internal to DynamoDB. The output of the hash function will determine where in physical storage the data will be stored. 

In the case of a **composite key**, the partition key will still determine the physical location of the data, but the sort key determines the order the data is stored. Multiple items in a sorted partition may have the same partition key, but the sort key of items in the partition must then be unique. 

#### Secondary Index
In addition to the primary key of a table, DynamoDB allows you to set an alternate set of keys to query data. There are two types of indexes you can create:

**Global Secondary Index**: partition key and sort key are different than the one set on the table

**Local Secondary Index**: same partition key as table, but different sort key

#### Best Practices for Partition Keys
1. **high-cardinality**: many possible values for a single attribute
   - unique id attributes are best
2. **composite attributes**: try to combine more than one attribute to form a key

### Best Practices for Data Modelling
1. Maintain spacial locality, that is keeping related data together if possible. Compared to using multiple tables and spreading your data across multiple locations, items that are logically related to one other should be close together. 
2. Leverage composite keys and sort order. Just using a partition key limits the flexibility of queries you can perform. 
3. Distribute queries so that you are not querying one section of the database, try to evenly spread the traffic across DynamoDB
4. Use global secondary indices to assist in querying

---

#### Sources
This guide is an amalgamation of information synthesized from these resources:
- https://docs.aws.amazon.com/amazondynamodb/latest/developerguide/HowItWorks.CoreComponents.html
- https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/database/using-sort-keys-to-organize-data-in-amazon-dynamodb/
- https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/database/choosing-the-right-dynamodb-partition-key/
- https://docs.aws.amazon.com/amazondynamodb/latest/developerguide/Introduction.html